Okay, we're running.
I'm really very pleased to be talking to you.
I'm a fan of longstanding.
And I generally write about books and authors for a number.
I've got about 22 papers now, I guess it is.
And the Allentown morning call is one of my clients.
Is that where Lehigh is?
Yeah, I guess.
I've never been down there.
Yeah, it is.
I'm teasing.
But they called and asked if I'd be willing to talk.
I said, are you kidding?
I said, when I found out you were going to be in Boston, you know, great.
So it's fortuitous for me.
Thank you.
I guess because the subject of your talk at Lehigh is, maybe we just ought to give a little bit about the theme of your speech, or your lecture rather, which is the playwright versus the American theater.
What is the title of this, I guess?
No, just the playwright versus the theater.
I don't know if you could just give me a nice, inclusive title.
I was going to talk about whatever I want.
I see.
So it changes.
So this is not a set piece, so to speak.
I have some things that I'm forced to say over and over again because nobody pays any attention to what I say.
But no, I like to improvise.
I don't even speak from a text.
Really?
No, because that way you can't look at people.
What's more boring than sitting there watching somebody who's reading something?
I agree.
It's so boring.
Do you see it as a form of performance?
Any public appearance is a form of performance.
You have to be effective on the stage.
You've got to engage with your audience.
That's one of the reasons I don't read from a text, because I like to look at people and make eye contact.
That's very important.
But I don't consider it as a performance in any pejorative sense, no.
No, and I certainly don't intend to suggest it in a pejorative sense either.
When did the play open in London, by the way?
Free Toll of Women.
Yes, I know the play, but when did it open?
Last Tuesday.
And how's it going?
Well, I've never seen such reviews.
Extraordinary.
Wonderful.
You must say again, I'm sorry?
Almost embarrassing.
Not quite, but almost.
No, why do you say that?
Well, because they're so good.
I mean, the London Times called the play a towering masterpiece.
Now, that's just silly.
You know, it's a good play.
You don't agree.
Well, listen, I'll take it where I can get it, but I don't think about myself or my own, what I write in those terms.
Do the English respond differently to your work, do you find, say, than the... And I'm not talking critics either.
I'm talking about theatergoers.
It's hard to generalize.
I think there's probably a longer tradition of people who go to the theater being exposed to a greater variety of theater in London.
I mean, those awful musicals haven't completely taken over the London theater yet.
Mm-hmm.
You've got two national theaters in London, the National Theater and the Royal Shakespeare Company, that are doing really first-rate plays, you know, Euripides, Chekhov, Decad, people like that.
So people have more of an opportunity to see good stuff and therefore have more of an opportunity to make intelligent decisions about what theater should be all about.
Do Euripides and Chekhov attract good audiences, too?
They fill the house, basically?
They do.
Do you think that would happen here as well if we gave people the opportunity to see such plays?
Yes, of course.
I've been convinced for years that if somebody let me fill every single Broadway theater with great plays for a period of 10 years, beautifully acted, that that would become the taste of the theater-going audience in America.
You don't mind if I hop around here.
I once asked, this is a number of years ago, when I was doing an interview with Robert Sheru, the publisher and editor.
Of course, we have, as I'm sure you do, a shared passion for Shakespeare.
And I asked him this silly question, if you had an opportunity to ask William Shakespeare one question, what would it be?
And he said, interestingly, and I think it's germane to a discussion with you, is I would ask him why he never saw the need or the necessity to publish his own plays.
Of course, these were all done posthumously.
And I wonder, you know, being a person who writes for performance, certainly your works are published, but you're writing material that is to be perceived in action.
I wonder if this provokes any kind of a comment from you.
It's not necessarily a question.
Well, there weren't that many publishing houses.
Getting your work published was a rich man's game, basically.
in london and he was concerned getting his plays performed i don't think he thought about it very much i can't imagine that he did but i wonder if he just thought that they were ephemeral works though no i doubt that even even today you know playwrights like to get their work in print especially in acting editions but but uh nobody uh people do not buy many copies of plays you know so it's not that important the question that i would ask
Shakespeare, aside from maybe a couple of questions about some of his plays, like does Hamlet really have to be that long?
And a more important question, I'm convinced that when Lear, at the beginning of the play, asks his daughter those questions, he's joking.
He's kidding around, is my conviction.
And when he gets those awful answers,
That's what sets the whole play in motion.
Most people do it like he was asking nasty questions, but I don't think he was.
I think he was, you know, he was kidding, hardly expecting the answers that he got.
But I think even more than that, the question I would ask him is what does he think of Chekhov and what does he think of Becker?
Hmm.
As, uh,
As fellow playwrights.
Now, why does the Lear question bother you so much?
Oh, I know.
It's just because of questions of interpretation of the play.
Most productions I've seen do it one way, but logic tells me that I can't imagine Shakespeare intended it that way.
Interesting.
I'm reading, Joe, and preparing for...
This discussion this morning, I'm going through the Oxford Companion to American Theater just to see what Gerald Boardman writes about you.
And this is pretty interesting.
Let me read this to you.
This is towards the end.
His later plays, however literate and thoughtful...
have lacked the theatricality of his first efforts.
So whether Albee eventually will fulfill the exciting promise of his early work seems doubtful.
Well, of course, that all depends on what you consider theatricality.
There are all kinds of theatricality.
There are different kinds of theatricality.
I've never written a play that isn't theatrical.
But you can be theatrical in so many different ways.
I mean, you know, you can be...
sort of noisy and crashing around like Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?
I think that's wonderfully theatrical.
But if you're quietly theatrical, like an either delicate balancer all over, there's some people who get disappointed because they expect the kind of noisy theatricality it had before.
No, but I'm not the man of the theater.
I've never written a play that isn't theatrical.
Yeah.
Well, I think this book is 1984, and he suggests that you may not achieve your early promise.
And here, of course, we have what many regard as one of your great plays now playing in London.
Well, he's just going to have to revise his book.
Yeah.
But, I mean, do you feel a bit of satisfaction when people say something wrong?
No, I wish they wouldn't make judgments prematurely, and I wish they wouldn't do sweeping generalizations.
And it's kind of fun when somebody like me can probably take that quote and make fun of it and print it.
I don't think anybody should really be writing about a person's career until the career is over.
I mean, I've written 22 plays.
With any luck, I'll write another 20.
And then, when I die, then it's time to start examining.
Do you see it as a corpus every... Oh, sure.
It must be, of course.
Yeah.
And that... It all ties together in some way, and the total statement is more important than trying to make value judgments about work in progress.
So it is a synergistic kind of a thing, that the sum is greater than the parts, perhaps.
No, it was easily as equal.
Louise Nevelson once told me that she considered, she made hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of sculptures.
She said it's all one piece.
That's wonderful.
Who is that again, I'm sorry?
Louise Nevelson.
Louise Nevelson, I'm sorry.
I know who she is, I just didn't hear it the first time.
What do you tell, I mean, I'm sure everybody, I know I write about books and authors, and I've just finished writing my own book when they're just thankfully forthcoming next year.
Oh, sorry, what's it about?
It's actually, my interest here, it's about collecting.
It's about the passion for, it's about bibliomania, actually.
I do it with paintings and scopes.
I understand, yeah, that you have... I don't even think of it as collecting, I just think of it as accumulating.
Really?
Yeah.
No, there must be a focus.
The accumulators... I'm so bored with these art collectors who are so self-conscious about what they collect.
I just like to surround myself with stuff that I've used to.
So I just don't like the term collector for art anyway.
It's too pretentious.
I was at that sale last week in New York at Christie's.
when the Leonardo da Vinci Codex went for $31 million.
Was there any good?
If you can believe it, yeah.
And the advances were, this is what blew everybody away, is the advances were in million-dollar increments.
Oh, that's nice.
Did you look at it?
Was there any good?
It's beautiful.
They put out a gorgeous catalog of it.
But, I mean, the pre-sale estimate was $10 million.
Right.
And I don't know if you were probably in England.
Bill Gates was the... Yeah, yeah, I know.
Well, I mean, he's got more money than he knows what to do.
Yeah, this is like one day's worth of, you know... Exactly.
That's interest on a month to visit.
That's right.
But I guess an overriding question for me is, I know how hard it is to get a book published.
To get a play produced has to be a thousand times harder.
Well, it depends, of course, on the same with a book.
If you want a big, massive publishing house with a massive advertising campaign, that's a lot harder than a small publishing house that just puts out a thousand copies.
It's a great deal harder for the blockbuster.
And the work is usually worse, of course, with the blockbuster.
It depends on where you want to get a play produced.
I've never had any trouble getting plays of mine produced.
Yeah, but you're the dominant American playwright, too.
It's tougher even for me.
I have to go far afield.
Nobody's wanted to produce a play of mine on Broadway now for 15 years.
And even when Three Tall Women opened off-Broadway,
and got great reviews.
Nobody, none of the Broadway theater owners wanted to take it and put it on Broadway.
Do you have an understanding as to why that is?
Yeah, they're assholes.
Give me something I can use.
They didn't think it would be commercially viable on Broadway.
Uh-huh.
And we're ten months into our run in a 500-seat theater right now, so...
Isn't that wonderful?
Yeah, it would have done nicely on Broadway.
I mean, do you feel any kind of satisfaction in demonstrating that they are assholes?
Well, it's nice to stick your tongue out at people every once in a while.
It would be nicer if they'd learned something, but they don't.
But there's a deeper problem here, isn't there, though?
It's a comment on what they do put on Broadway, isn't it?
They put on Broadway what they think in their infinite wisdom is going to make a lot of money for them.
And now we see Disney coming to Broadway.
How do you respond to that?
Well, I have no objection to the Disney industry per se.
But some of the things that are happening with that particular piece are destructive to the Dramatist Guild and the protection of our playwrights.
It's a complex matter and too parochial to get into here.
But there are danger signs in that thing that have to do with playwrights' royalties and rights.
But I mean the larger question of these Hollywood types, presuming that they can come to Broadway.
In a democracy, people are supposed to get what they want.
So that permits Republicans.
Like Newt Gingrich.
Isn't this scary?
Now that's scary.
It produces people like that, and it produces Disney.
Or Michael Eisner, who may even be more threatening.
They get what they want, but what people don't understand is they also get what they deserve.
To get back to writing for the stage as opposed to writing primarily for books, what do you tell a creative young man or woman who comes up and says to you, I want to be a playwright?
Do you encourage this as a life choice?
I tell them first, come on in and be a playwright if you will feel incomplete without doing it.
If it's essential, then do it, but only if you're really driven, because it's a tough racket.
I mean, you explain, going back to what I said earlier, how it's hard enough to get a novel published or a volume of poetry.
Yeah, and I tell them there's compromise, that this can be pushed all the way, and betrayal, and it's a tough racket.
And so I tell them, be sure two things, A, that you want to be a playwright, and B, that you think you can stand it.
What is the quality of contemporary, I mean, not excluding yourself, how do you look around?
You would ask Shakespeare what he would think of Beckett and Chekhov.
I ask you what you see when you look around among your contemporaries.
I don't want to get into naming names.
But I think we've got an awful lot of interesting young writers.
An awful lot of them are having much more trouble getting their work in front of a large public.
but thank God for regional theaters and the off-off-off Broadway theaters, university theaters.
These people are being seen and heard, but not in the commercial arenas as much as they should be.
I read somewhere that it was... Shepard, who's a good playwright, for example, has never had a play on Broadway.
Never will, either.
Why did he say never will?
Probably because what gets on Broadway keeps getting worse and worse each year.
Where did the people who determined the destiny of what gets on Broadway, where is it that they took the wrong turn?
At what point did American theater make the decision to go to where it is now?
I can't give you the date.
I guess I'm looking for a philosophic... It's the dead hand of commerce is what it is.
That's...
Theater, it must be a money-making business, and the way to make money is never underestimate the taste of the American audience.
However, I mean, a serious drama must cost so much less to produce and to mount than one of these big extravaganzas which cost them a million.
Yeah, but the returns aren't as large either.
Yeah, but the risks are... I was reading somewhere the other day that, what musical was that?
Annie.
which is not one of the worst ones, you know, it's tolerable, has made $300 million.
Geez.
Think about that.
Wow.
A straight play is never going to make anything near that because it's not going to be done in every theater around the country the way the musicals are.
People love musicals in America.
They go to the theater because they can listen to tunes and not have to think.
This is kind of, this is a sad commentary on, of course, we go back to Bill Gates and what he represents and, you know, whether or not there will be books.
It's really a sad commentary on the way our kids are educated, the way people are led to want less than they should from their arts.
I did an interview recently with Harold Bloom.
He's convinced that literature, and he teaches at Yale,
He said he can't retire because he's so concerned that there are so few people left teaching literature that it's not going to be taught.
People may not even have courses in Shakespeare.
It may be part of a survey course.
He's concerned that Dante will only be read by specialists.
I teach playwriting at the University of Houston, and I've got some talented kids there.
But they come to my courses filled with amazing ignorance.
Wow.
They haven't read Chekhov.
They haven't read Beckett.
They don't know.
You have named Chekhov and Beckett twice.
I think they're the two most important playwrights of the 20th century.
Really?
I sense that.
Tell me...
I guess when you began thinking about being a writer, the thought was fiction.
Is that correct, novels?
I started writing poetry when I was about eight, I think.
Uh-huh.
Did you have any of that around?
I don't think so.
And I read someplace that it was Thornton Wilder who suggested to you that you might take a whack at doing plays.
Yeah, I think he was trying to save poetry from me.
Yeah.
How did this come about, I wonder?
Oh, I don't know.
I was visiting a friend up at the McDowell Colony, and I carried a lot of my poetry around with me, and I showed it to anybody who was interested.
But did he see some sort of dramatic potential there?
He must have.
Or, as I say, he was just trying to steer me away from poetry.
He could have suggested woodworking probably as easily.
If we could talk, and I won't take up too much more of your time.
I told Janet that I'd only bother you for about a half an hour, so indulge me kindly for ten more minutes, and I'll let you go enjoy the day.
By the way, where is Three Tall Women playing in London?
At Wyndham's Theatre.
Okay, and that's W... W-Y-N-D-H-A-M-S.
Great, thank you.
It's right there on Buster Square.
Terrific.
Um...
This play right now, Three Tall Women, is said to be one of the most personal of your plays, one of the most, I don't know, I read one quote from you that you see it almost as an exorcism.
Well, I suppose it is to a certain extent, but yeah, a lot of it was based on factual occurrences.
But I think what I did was reinvent fact and distort fact
toward dramatic needs.
So while it's based upon a certain person, I think it extends beyond the individual person.
It may be an exorcism, but it wasn't an act of revenge anyway.
I was able to be objective about a person that I didn't really like.
Is this a play that you had been thinking about doing for some time?
Was it time to do this play?
Well, I didn't want to do it while the subject was still alive because it would have made her unhappy.
She was unhappy enough in her last four or five years of her life.
You know, encroaching sinility and illness and fear and hatred and all those things.
A lot of old people unfortunately developed.
I waited until she died and then it broke itself fairly quickly.
I read also that
When you actually embark on the writing of a play, this thing has been percolating for a number of years.
Yeah, but I never know how long, of course.
Because I don't know how long I've been thinking about a play before I've been aware that I'm thinking about it.
Have you thought at all about writing novels?
I wrote two of them in my teens.
And I never plan to touch again.
It's too much work.
All those words you have to write.
Do you read?
Hundreds of pages of description and narrative and all that stuff.
In a play, you just have to put down what people say and what they don't say.
Which can often be equally as important.
Oh, sure.
Now, you've directed a few of your plays.
And other people.
And other people's plays.
Beckett and Shepard and Mamet and Wilson, a lot of people.
Mm-hmm.
tell me a little bit about directing as opposed to writing the creative challenge I guess is what I'm looking for very different crafts of course and directing is interpretive and writing is creative the same way the acting is interpretive now it's quite a responsibility to interpret creatively the work of another writer I would imagine well
I'm sorry?
Do you interpret it?
You translate it, basically, from the page to the stage, and you try to translate it intact.
And when you're dealing, of course, with a living playwright, you can talk to this person and say, is this what you had in mind, or do you do that?
Sure, of course you can, yes.
But when you're dealing with... When you're dealing with Chekhov and now Beckett... You have to make informed guesses.
but trying to be as accurate as you possibly can to your vision and the other guy's vision.
I'll give you an interesting example.
I was directing a play by Beckett in Houston a couple of years ago, and there was a stage direction that Beckett had in there.
And I said, you know, that's wrong.
He shouldn't do that.
The character shouldn't do that.
So I didn't have him do it.
And, you know, Beckett's, you know,
It's practically gospel now, you know, I'm supposed to change a comma.
I've never changed a line of the play.
But, so I made this change, and then I read, about three months after I did it, that the last time Beckett had directed that play himself, that's exactly the change he had made.
What was the play?
It was, perhaps, last tape.
Uh-huh.
But he had made the same change.
And what, could you just tell me technically what the change was?
It doesn't matter, like, um,
an exit and a re-entry.
I said that last exit is unnecessary.
I don't think he'd do it.
So I didn't have him make the last exit and re-entry.
And I discovered that Beckett becomes the same conclusion.
Isn't that something?
That's nice.
Yeah, I mean, that must be quite a... I mean, it's just the intuitive feeling, isn't it?
Exactly.
One playwright for another.
Yeah.
Do you feel that you're, where did I see this in some, but do you, one of these quotes that you are engaged sometimes, you feel sometimes that you're engaged in a battle for the soul of the American theater.
What a quote.
I never say that.
That can't be a quote.
Well, I think it wasn't a quote, but it was, this piece was faxed to me, incidentally.
Well, my concern is trying to get people to
look at the things that I want them to look at, think about things the way I want them to think about them.
The theater is engagement.
And do you feel that the future of the theater in America is, are you optimistic?
If I weren't an optimist, I wouldn't write plays.
Great.
And are you working on something now that's...
Don't want to talk about it.
Great.
I don't expect you to.
I've written two plays since Three Tall Women.
Three Tall Women was first done and I directed that in Vienna at the English Theater about four years ago.
I've written two plays since.
Two and a half.
Great.
Any plans for something forthcoming in New York?
Probably this talk next season of doing a revival of
one of my plays on Broadway.
We'll see.
Great.
I'm not holding my breath.
And I'm planning to direct or do a Virginia Woolf in London about a year from now.
Just tell me briefly, again, something else.
I've read that your conviction that Betty Davis and James Mason would have been far better.
Well, they certainly would have been.
Well, they would have been different, very interesting movies.
The only problem I had with Elizabeth Taylor when she did Virginia Woolf was that she was 20 years too young.
And Davis was exactly the right age, and so was Mason.
I think it would have been certainly a really interesting picture.
Sir, I'm not going to take up too much of your time.
I think I've used my allotted 30 minutes.
You're on about 27 of them, yeah.
Now, when did you get back from London, just a couple days ago?
I got back from London on Thursday.
Okay, and did you give a talk here in Boston?
No, I gave a talk on Friday in New York at Pace University.
And I came up here yesterday, and I'm giving a talk at 1 o'clock this afternoon.
Then I'm flying back to London.
You're flying back to London?
Yeah, just for a couple of days.
Wow.
And then I'm going down to Miami.
I've got a house in Coconut Grove.
I'm going to go down there and do Thanksgiving and lie in the sun.
Sounds great.
Now, where are you giving today's talk?
Here in Boston, the Greater Boston Business.
Ah.
So you do give a number of... You are an active speaker.
Oh, yeah.
I lecture a lot, mostly at universities.
Great.
Let me say that most of the papers I write for, I have targeted university towns.
Oh, great.
And I'm in Eugene, Oregon.
I'm in Knoxville.
I'm in Salt Lake City.
I'm in Gainesville.
Great.
Toledo, Columbus, Madison, some of them.
You're a perfect kind of a subject for me.
And if you have a P.O.
box or something, I'd be pleased to see that you get a copy of this piece.
Down at 14 Harrison Street.
Okay.
New York City.
10013.
Okay, terrific.
Nice talking to you.
Nice talking to you, too.
Good luck.
Good luck with the boat.
Thank you very much.
Bye-bye.